\input psfig.tex
\input texinfo
@c %**start of header
@setfilename april.info
@settitle April Reference Manual
@c %**end of header
@c @smallbook
@setchapternewpage odd
@include version.texi

@dircategory Programming
@direntry
* april: (april).		Agent programming language
@end direntry

@titlepage
@title April Reference Manual
@subtitle Version @value{VERSION}, last updated @value{UPDATED}.
@author F.G. McCabe @email{fgm@@fla.fujitsu.com}

@c  The following two commands
@c  start the copyright page.
@page
@vfill
@copyright{} 1994-2004 Imperial College and F.G. McCabe.

All rights reserved.

@end titlepage
     
@node Top
@top Overview

@noindent
This is the 
@ifinfo
on-line
@end ifinfo 
Reference Manual for the @code{April} language, Version @value{VERSION}.  
@refill

This manual offers an in-depth and complete description of the
@code{April} language. However, it is not a tutorial on the language,
and the order of presentation within the manual reflects that. For a
more tutorial introduction, the reader is referred to @emph{Programming
in April: An Agent Process Interaction Language} (by F.G. McCabe and
K.L. Clark). For a compact description of the facilities and features of
@code{April} the reader is referred to the @emph{April Pocket Reference
Guide}. In addition, see @url{http://www.nar.fujitsulabs.com}.

@ifinfo
@copyright{} 1994-2004 Imperial College and F.G. McCabe

This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or
modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License
as published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2
of the License, or (at your option) any later version.

This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
GNU General Public License for more details.

You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
along with this program; if not, write to the Free Software
Foundation, Inc., 675 Mass Ave, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.

For a more complete description of the licence terms under which this
software may be used @pxref{Copying}.

All rights reserved.
Last updated @value{UPDATED}
@end ifinfo


@menu
* Copying::                     Your rights and freedoms
* Compiling April programs::    Using the @code{April} compiler
* How to invoke April::         Getting started
* April programs::              Format of an @code{April} program
* Data values and types::       Legal @code{April} values and types
* Expressions::                 Format of valid @code{April} expressions
* Patterns::                    Format of @code{April} patterns
* Statements::                  Format of @code{April} patterns
* Functions and procedures::    Format of @code{April} functions and procedures
* Tests and conditions::        @code{April}'s standard test functions.
* Arithmetic functions::        Standard arithmetic functions.
* Input and output::            Standard procedures and functions for I/O.
* String handling::             Standard string handling functions.
* Lists and sets::              Standard compound structure handling functions.
* Processes::                   Standard functions for process manipulation.
* April communications::        How April programs communicate
* Environment::                 Access to standard O/S functions.
* Resource limited execution::  Executing programs in a limited environment
* Debugging April programs::    Interfacing with the debugger.
* April syntax::                Rules for writing @code{April} programs
* Extending the April system::  Extending April with plug-in modules
* April grammar::               @code{April}s formal grammar.
* Standard operators::          April's standard predefined operators
* Standard error codes::        April's standard error codes
* Encoded term format::         How April values are encoded in messages
* Notes for April v4 programmers:: Differences between V4 and V5 of @code{April}
* Concept index::
* Function index::
@end menu

@include compiling.texi
@include invoke.texi
@include program.texi
@include values.texi
@include expressions.texi
@include patterns.texi
@include statement.texi
@include predicate.texi
@include functions.texi
@include arith.texi
@include io.texi
@include string.texi
@include lists.texi
@include process.texi
@include communicate.texi
@include environ.texi
@include resource.texi
@include debugging.texi
@include syntax.texi
@include dll.texi
@include grammar.texi
@include operators.texi
@include errors.texi
@include encoded.texi
@include v4notes.texi
@include gpl.texi

@node Concept index
@unnumbered Concept index
@printindex cp

@node Function index
@unnumbered Standard function index
@printindex fn

@summarycontents
@contents
@bye
