@node Standard error codes
@appendix Standard error codes
@cindex Standard error codes

@noindent
Nearly every built-in function and procedure may give rise to an error
if invoked incorrectly. An error value is of the standard @code{error}
type:

@smallexample
error ::= error(string,symbol) | failed | timedout | clickedout ;
@end smallexample

@noindent
The @code{error} constructor has two arguments: a descriptive string
explaining the error and a symbol denoting the classification of the error;
In this appendix we list the standard error codes:

@table @code
@item 'matcherr
This is raised when a match failed in a situation where it is not safe
for it to do so.
@item 'privileged
This is raised when a privilege violation is flagged -- such as
attempting to execute a privileged operation, or an invalid access to
teh file system.
@item 'system
This is raised when the operation is potentially correct but the system
could not honour it -- due to space limitation for example.
@item 'exec
This is raised when attempting an illegal instruction or executing
non-valid code.
@item 'compval
This is raised when attempting to compare incomparible values -- such as
two code segments.
@item 'invalid
This is raised when arguments have invalid values -- such as attempting
to take the square root of a negative number.
@item 'arith
This is raised when an arithmetic operation raised a problem -- such as
divide by zero.
@item 'abort
This is raised when the user causes the system to abort.
@item 'fail
This is raised when an operation fails -- such as attempting to open a
nn-existent for reading.
@item 'eof
This is raised when attempting to read past the end of file.
@item 'io
This is raised when an I/O error is raised while reading or writing
@item 'net
This is raised when a network error occurs -- such as being unable to find a
host.
@end table

